so about eleven years ago I gave a talk
in California at the TED Conference and
it went really well it was called ten
ways the world could end tomorrow but it
also went viral at a time before things
started going viral and it wasn't in a
good way it ended up on thousands of
nutty websites these are the kind of
websites for people who think men in
black is a documentary it's a kind of
websites for people actually believe the
Mayan calendar does predict doomsday so
if you googled me before this talk
you've seen maybe nine or ten references
to me as a science magazine editor and
three weeks after the talk there were
418 references linking moi to little
green men for Mars now coincidentally I
was teaching my mother how to use a
computer at the time long distance and I
was teaching her about Google so guess
who she googled first so
I started worrying about my reputation
little and I decided to call Chris
Anderson the Ted curator I knew Chris
would not want Ted speakers to be
co-opted by every nutjob on the web and
maybe he could get his friends Larry and
Sergey at Google to erase all this I was
a little disappointed didn't exactly get
sympathy I was looking for Chris thought
it was funny but he did ask me to do
another TED talk and I jumped at the
chance because I saw it as a Redemption
I could do 10 reasons to be optimistic
about the future and I did was a great
talk honestly my best talk ever full of
surprises lots of interesting science
but he didn't go over so well
everybody wanted another 10 ways the
world could end suddenly and no one
hosted the optimistic talk so when Mike
and Linda asked me to give a talk of
TEDx these many years later I had lots
of good ideas but guess what they wanted
and that's why we're here dr. doom and
gloom so let's begin the 2013 countdown
okay you're looking at n1 h1 it's the
original flu virus that caused the last
great pandemic the Spanish flu of 1918
which infected 50% of the world's
population at the time which was a
billion people and probably killed one
out of every ten people but here's the
interesting thing about it it came in
three waves three different waves pretty
much about six months apart and the
second wave killed every single person
who got the flu and that is how bad flu
can be now here we are in 2013 and in
barnyards all over China there are ducks
and pigs and chickens in close proximity
and that's actually
we're influenza originates now viruses
have gotten so good at mutating and in
these barnyards mostly that you and I
have to get a flu shot every year to
protect against this although I will
tell you something interesting less than
half of the population in the United
States does get a flu shot every year
but that is not what keeps the Centers
for Disease Control up at night what
they worry about is something called a
recombinant flu bug and here's how it
works there are two kinds of viruses
they're viruses infect animals and
animals pass them easily to other
animals and then there are viruses that
infect humans and they pass them easily
to other humans when a human has
something like the Hong Kong flu or in
2009 that h1n1 that came back and they
go to the market and they buy a chicken
that happens to have one of these animal
viruses and they take it home and they
don't cook it properly and they eat it
they get the animal virus and now inside
that person are two kinds of viruses a
virus that transmits easily from human
to human and a virus that transmits
easily from animal to animal but in
almost all cases that animal virus is
far more toxic and far more of a killer
now in just the last few weeks a new
very deadly animal flu called h7n9 has
popped up about a hundred people are
infected a lot of them have died and
this is one that the CDC is really
worried about and we could be looking at
another worldwide pandemic like the
Spanish flu if a human being who has a
human-type virus that transmits easily
to people happens to eat one of these
animals now there are solutions to this
but we live in a very different world
from 1918 there are 80,000 commercial
jets that take off every day full of
passengers it would take a flu virus
about two weeks to circle the globe
private producers cannot make enough
vaccine fast enough to save us
the only thing that we can do is what
the Australian government has done which
is to create laboratories that are ready
to go on a moment's notice to create
vast quantities of flu virus we should
do this second we need to make a simple
dipstick test you go to the drugstore
you buy swab you put it in your mouth if
it turns blue you have the flu how many
times have you gone to the doctor do I
have the flu do I have a bacterial
infection half the time they don't even
know when a pandemic comes you want to
know if you have the flu and you will
not be able to find a doctor thirdly we
need to invest in a really good public
health system we've actually been firing
about 50,000 public health workers in
the last three years you know 4050 years
ago this country built thousands of bomb
shelters because we thought nuclear war
was a real threat if we can do that we
can build a public health system that
will take care of us in a pandemic
number seven isn't that beautiful that's
a mass coronal ejections off the Sun it
makes something called the solar flare
look like kindergarten it shoots
uncountable numbers of atoms that have
been broken apart into little particles
and radiation out into space almost all
of these blasts missed the earth because
the Sun is like this huge yellow beach
ball in space and really like this
little tiny BB at the end of the
auditorium so no matter which direction
the Sun sends out its it's very unusual
for us to get a direct hit however
happened last August and it happened a
month ago and you would not have been
wanting to fly and been in an airplane
at that time in 1859 a coronal mass
ejection took the brand-new US telegraph
system it basically melted it it started
fires it shocked the operators and the
wires disappeared most of the time our
magnetic field in our atmosphere protect
us from coronal mass ejections but a
severe direct hit would take out the
entire world's power grid at
once and all the satellites in orbit
plunging us essentially into a 19th
century existence it would take 20 years
to restore half the grid because we do
not have backup try to imagine life
without electricity
almost all cities would become an
uninhabitable we build skyscrapers 80
stories high and up and 2 stories
underground we need to create safety
zones beneath our buildings we should be
building down 8 stories for every 80
stories up and we should make that part
of our building code we are state of new
jersey is rebuilding 20,000 bridges in
the state because they know there will
be a massive earthquake on the east
coast sooner or later if we can do that
we can have different building codes for
our buildings we should also view
transformers and wires as vulnerable and
expendable and we should have hardened
underground power plants ready to go in
an emergency this is a synthetic genome
invented by the craig Venter Institute
and inserted into a bacterial cell to
create what I would call a new life-form
this life-form never existed before and
it can reproduce it was done 3 years ago
and the goal is Noble it's to produce
anything we want from a cell takes in
certain things puts out stuff that we
want for example they could make
synthetic vaccines or they could turn
carbon dioxide into usable fuels now
what to be wrong with that our history
is littered with examples of bad things
that got out of secure labs and things
that go amuck when we try to tamper with
Mother Nature and here's a low-tech
example we brought kudzu here from Japan
to control soil erosion didn't work out
so well and meanwhile labs around the
world are experimenting with biotech in
ways you cannot a man
you can create a perfect in vitro male
baby with blonde hair and blue eyes and
you can make modified corn do anything
you want now is genetically modified
corn savings from famines I see it as a
threat to the only purely wild corn
genome left in the world that grows in
Mexico look at number one here watch
closer regulate more watch closer
regulate more no single federal agency
or a single law governs this vast new
world instead there's a hodgepodge of
regulations from the Food and Drug
Administration the United States
Department of Agriculture and the EPA we
need a new single agency of the
government to bring order to this
meanwhile less watched people are
entering this field all the time and
amateurs will follow Kickstarter just
got its first proposal for a synthetic
life-form a plant that would glow at
night so we can sprinkle its seeds along
roadsides and eliminate streetlights
remember that genetically modified crops
are not driven by a need to produce a
better world and to save people from
starvation they are driven by money and
synthetic biology is about money too now
for a little humor I'm going to tell you
this you're not going to believe it
computers will be smarter than us in 20
years you know this stuff you know that
deep blue can play chess better than
anyone on the face of the planet and you
know that the Google car can drive
itself better than you can drive it it's
hasta la vista time time to wake up and
smell a silicon if you want to get ahead
of this curve you are going to have to
become a cyborg
number four a lot of volcanoes go off
these things are huge trouble we do not
live on a nice stable solid planet it is
mostly molten rock and iron and it
probably has a nuclear reactor in the
center of it that keeps it hot we're
like on these life rafts floating over
all this molten rock Earth's crust is so
constantly folding in on itself that we
cannot find a stone on the surface of
the earth that is as old as the planet
ninety-eight percent of all the species
on earth have gone extinct and volcanoes
are the biggest reason why the 11
biggest extinctions four were caused by
volcanoes a new study that links the
Late Triassic extinction of volcanic
eruptions and outflows are a new study
links the the this this amazing
extinction of life 95% of life on Earth
to volcanoes that essentially stretched
and all went off at the same time
essentially stretched from what was then
or what is now New Jersey to what is now
Morocco in our past Earth has opened up
many times and flowed out for centuries
India is an outflow of volcanism
volcanic activity fills this guy with
soot and hot ash and berries every
living thing and blocks the Sun for so
many summers the plants on land and
plankton in the sea die and when they
die we die volcanoes can also produce so
much carbon dioxide dioxide that they
will massively warm the planet and
create a runaway greenhouse effect which
is the opposite of what we often expect
from them in Holland they grow most of
their food in greenhouses with synthetic
light 24 hours a day we can do that when
I was putting this talk together I just
had this weird idea I went to Amazon I
look to see how much they were and how
good they are gas masks are the cheapest
insurance you can buy they don't take up
much space and then get you through a
lot of hard times and fine
the ultimate solution to living on a
planet like ours which really is
unstable and will not last forever and
four and a half billion years the Sun
will take us in our species will
eventually die if we do not colonize
other planets in other solar systems
number three a runaway greenhouse effect
I just spoke about that a little or an
ecosystem collapse okay no surprise
we're heating up in 1990 the mean
atmospheric temperature of Earth was
fourteen and a half degrees centigrade
in twenty three years we've gone up 3/4
of a degree never in the history of this
planet we know from ice cores has carbon
dioxide risen so fast when we get to
sixteen and a half degrees that's one
and a quarter degrees from where we are
we will lose control of our climate or
let me put it a different way it will
become extremely unpredictable every
major extinction in Earth's history has
been characterized by rapid increases in
co2 and we're now in an unprecedented
period of increases in co2 normally the
atmosphere releases about 10% of the
heat we get from the Sun but as we heat
up more and more water turns to vapor
more global warming methane and other
gases are released from the northern and
southern permafrost and at some point
the earth works like a greenhouse gets
into a feedback loop that eventually
will turn us into Venus where the
average daytime temperature is 900
degrees Fahrenheit at the same time
we're witnessing a huge extinction cycle
in the next 25 years we will lose 25% of
all species in the Hawaiian Islands
alone we're devastating our oceans by
overfishing them and we're killing our
coral reefs with heat somewhere in the
Amazon rainforest is what I like to call
a marginal tree we keep cutting down
oxygen producing trees and someday when
we get to that marginal tree we will see
the beginning of the collapse of our
oxygen ecosystem we are still asleep at
the wheel
global warming is an emergency it's
almost incomprehensible how much co2 we
have to
stop putting in the air in the next 10
years to stop this process and we need
to prioritize the animals and the and
the amount of nature that we're trying
to save we can't save it all we need to
save the species that help us the most
now this is interesting because 11 years
ago this wasn't even my radar screen
because I don't think nuclear war was
any kind of significant threat there's a
good reason every major nation in the
world wants to keep Iran from getting
the bomb but there's a larger reason
that's really out of our control both
India and Pakistan have more than 100
nuclear weapons each far more than
enough to create a nuclear winter which
will kill us all they have fought three
wars since 1947 and India is developing
a nuclear submarine fleet so it can fire
its missiles from anywhere President
Obama has spoken about this idea it
makes tremendous sense and there's a
huge rap against anti-missile systems
because if we use it and we knock down
everybody else's missiles then we're
left with all the good missiles so part
of the reason to this problem or part of
the answer to this problem may be to
develop anti missile technology
cooperatively with many many other
nations and place them where they are
needed you have to fire an anti missile
30 seconds after a missile with a
warhead on it is fired so that it
catches it before it's on the downward
curve in space number one we cross paths
with a really big asteroid this is my
favorite now there's a possibility I've
been wrong about some of these things
the possibility some of these things
won't happen in the best sense of
journalism that's my disclaimer but I am
NOT wrong about this and this is what
keeps me up at night this is my passion
right now somewhere in space maybe in
the asteroid belt between Mars and
Jupiter or farther out in the Q per belt
of large objects that exist beyond
Neptune there's a missile with our name
on it
it could break out of its orbit tomorrow
are not for a hundred thousand years but
its fate is sealed it will hit earth it
has happened before many times get a
telescope and look at the moon it is
covered with asteroid hits and you'll
see that in a video in a second the
earth is just as pockmarked with
asteroid hits it's just that that
folding crust that we have that's hidden
a lot of them and vegetation has covered
a lot of it a large asteroid took out
the dinosaurs 65 million years ago by
creating shock waves and fire storms
across this planet and created a sky so
full of debris that summer did not
return for at least a hundred years and
maybe a thousand years had humans meant
alive then they would all have wiped
been wiped out now here's some hope 433
eros this is a huge Rock it's bigger
than the one it took out the dinosaurs
that orbits in the asteroid belt between
Mars and Jupiter at some time in its
future it will shift from a Mars
crossing orbit that it's in now to an
earth crossing orbit it will intersect
with where our planet is it is bigger
than the asteroid that killed off the
dinosaurs but here's where this thing
gets interesting
we took this photo from a space probe
that left the earth in the year 2000 a
NASA probe that was designed to study
asteroids and the spaceship settled into
orbit around the asteroid you can put a
baseball in orbit around meat if you're
in space there's enough gravity now when
the mission ended there was a little
leftover fuel there was a little
leftover electricity and the mission
controllers wasn't part of the mission
they landed the spacecraft on eros
successfully and since then we have
intercepted three comets in deep space
that move at twenty miles per second
stop and think about the implications of
those missions for the first time in
human history we have the ability to fly
an into an incoming asteroid and change
its orbit but only if we know it's there
and only if we have a rocket ready
to go most asteroids are found by
amateurs when it's too late to do
anything
NASA is looking for bad guys in the
asteroid belt and there are about 20,000
of them out there but they can't look in
the Cooper belt it's too far away and it
has a hundred thousand objects in it ten
times bigger than the asteroid that took
out the dinosaurs in only 20 years we
have developed the technology to change
our fate we can intercept an asteroid
and we can take it out of play one day
you or your children or their children
or their children's children will wake
up and this news will be real they the
headline on the front page of the New
York Times killer asteroid found on
collision course with earth what happens
after that if we're not prepared is
really beyond horror most humans will
not die from the impact most will die of
starvation and the price of insurance to
protect us from this is what we spend on
one b-2 bomber the asteroid problem is
stupidly obvious a physicist said almost
a hundred years ago there are two kinds
of civilizations those who can protect
themselves from an asteroid impact and
those who can't we're the former what
are we waiting for thank you
you